I'm very pleased to introduce our next
speaker who is another great friend of
mine uh Mr J Malika who is the senior
director of digital engagement at the
Perez art museum in Miami uh since
joining Pam in 2020 he's actually
created an entire digital department for
the museum and orchestrated a new
digital strategy that includes
digitizing the collection a multilingual
content strategy an open source access
program and virtual galleries featuring
work from digital artists uh this is a
little bit of a home coming for Jay he
was previously at the California Academy
of Sciences here in San Francisco as
well as the San Francisco Museum of
Modern Art where he led experiments in
art and Technology uh take it away
[Applause]
Jay hi everybody um I'm Jay uh first of
all I just want to say thank you to the
organizers of this Festival gray area
has been providing vital exhibitions and
programming to San Francisco for a long
time now and this is a huge
accomplishment for the team and I can't
put into words how honored I am to
present alongside so many absolute
Legends this lineup is incredible um
I've been working in museums in digital
for almost 14 years now and I've seen
the practice transform from support role
inside marketing or it departments to a
discipline in its own right with
corresponding departments centered
around access and user experience
digital departments scale the mission of
the museum beyond the walls of the
building
so I over the course of my career I've
developed and managed the digital
portfolios of three major museums um the
first Department I was in was called Web
Services at the California Academy of
Sciences at SF Moma I was part of the
web and digital platforms Department
then in 2020 I was offered the job of
director of digital engagement at the
Perez Art Museum Miami an entirely new
title and department for which I would
go on to originate in other words I have
participated in the maturation of this
field um from a support role to a vital
creative capacity in its own right even
with the attention uh all the attention
digital can feel held at arms length
from Museum operations while the word
museum is synonymous with its building
most museums would tell you that digital
literacy is a priority for the
organization but I can't imagine
conditions that would truly transition
away from anachronistic organizational
structures to Modern ways of being I've
spent my career navigating this tension
staking out new territories of
Engagement
and building audiences of global vide
visitors um at a museum every inch of
the building is contested over yet um
you can have a lot of uh interesting
things happen on the
internet so here I am speaking today
from that Vantage of a discipline and
Department within the museum that is cop
between kind of a grudging necessity or
an afterthought a digital Department may
maybe has the least to do with the
physical space in and of the Building
compared to other departments yet it
embodies the best chance museums have
for developing into sturdy institutions
in the 21st century I'd like to talk
about why things are the way they are
and how we can change the way museums
think to better serve contemporary
audiences
um what's going on here there we go
sorry uh there is a mounting oif in art
museums today art is inherently bound to
media literacy and a museum that
overwhelmingly prioritizes and acronis
mediums is not serving the public needs
as best it can it's time to dispose of
an an anachronistic models of art such
as painting sculpture video and move
toward models more aware of human
subjectivity the idea of artistic
mediums became a critical Concept in the
18th century as a way to identify
constraints what can a painting do or
not do or what can a sculpture or a
print do thus in art the idea of medium
emerged as a proxy for authenticity what
can technically be achieved with some
material Museum Cur C curatorial
departments often delineate along
mediums and thus in turn serve to fix
the presentation of art to these
mediums mediums of art can become fixed
by market forces what's easily sailable
will be collected and then
disproportionately make it to museums
via donations or Acquisitions this
fixation causes Divergence from social
concerns social behavior is heavily
influenced by advances in mass media
technology that is to say if a museum
has a curator of painting and sculpture
more paintings and sculptures will be
collected and presented thus this stuff
I mean sorry this stuff is boring
because it no longer reflects how we go
about our lives financialization has led
to utter segementation of
expression by the end of Barbara
London's essential and expansive history
of video art she is including software
and acknowledgement that the process of
modernization that in the process of
modernization mediums are trans
transitionary and permanent so maybe
don't organize your business around them
art consumption should reflect
information consumption if the variety
of mediums and art does not reflect the
variety of media through which one
consumes information art is not
performing its proper
function I've seen in my own work a
desire to break out of these Norms in
2017 my project send me sfmoma allowed
people to browse a collection by
descriptions rather than standard
methods like medium or period anybody
could text the number send me um with
the word send me followed by a
descriptive word and get sent back a
work from The Collection people not
asking to see paintings or sculptures
they were asking to see coffee in the
morning beer in the evening pumpkins in
the Autumn and sunshine during bad
weather the visitor cares little whether
they are looking at photographs or
paintings or sculptures rather they
interested in a novel experience
regardless of the medium how can we
reimagine categories of art to better
reflect modern mass media ask yourself
how did you learn what you learned
today just as our understanding of
physics and ecology has been refigured
to account for relativity of the
Observer so should our model of
presenting art art is relative like
physics or ecology today I'm proposing
an alternate way of thinking about art
presentation a more resilient framework
that can adapt and change uh can that
can adapt to change in technology a
framework for presenting art as it
relates to human subjectivity and mass
media technology the broader the
coverage in this framework the more
modernized the Museum's offerings are so
we have to ask ourselves two
questions how does the work change over
time is it static fixed in place at time
of creation or kinetic does it change
over time but on a set course or is it
Dynamic does it change due to inputs
like data or human
interaction and then where is the viewer
in relation to this work is it are they
respective of the work self-contained
entirely separate from the person
experiencing it or is it immersive is
the experiencer inside the work or is it
dispersive the experiencer is
distributed a personal copy of the work
copies of the work are numerous as super
unlimited so this is what it looks like
here's how we might organize some of our
favorite mediums in this Matrix we've
got paintings um you know you can have
to make a pilgrimage to see the Mona
Lisa and or dispersive every web browser
gets a copy of that
JPEG and then here's how we might put
some famous works of art into this
Paradigm you've got the Mona Lisa um and
we've got a kusama Infinity Room in the
static and immersive and then we've got
um be in the static dispersive everybody
can get a copy um and then we've got uh
Ragnar carton's the visitors in the
kinetic and immersive I heard him
described as the Mumford and Sons of
video art and I can't unthink that now
but it's a lovely piece and everybody
should go see it sfmoma um I was there
yesterday it was really
nice so let's think about this what
percent of art music collections fall
into each of these categories and I'm
sorry um I'm San Francisco so I thought
I'd pick on SF Moma a little bit more um
there will always be art or experiences
that mudle these distinctions The Matrix
is meant to be a tool not a
determination and please everybody argue
about this uh when we're done here uh
for museums to or serve their audiences
properly they should aim for an even
distribution of this grid um in the in
the collection and presentation of art
so from 2015 to 2019 I worked at sfmoma
and did a lot of EXP ation around the
collection there during that time the
collection was broken down under these
classifications so these are my 20 18ish
numbers that I got so this probably out
of date by now but you can get an idea
um so I can imagine most contemporary
museums would fall into similar patterns
there's no room for digital in this
framework as you see this distinction
long ago dissolved into the fabric of
our everyday lives terms like digital or
New Media have often been used by
museums as a dust bin for large Slots of
contemporary
art furthermore um here's uh Jason safe
he is a Miami artist he's known as a
painter but uses software to generate
the patterns that he uh in his work his
exhibition coming to fruition was uh the
first monographic exhibition of his and
it's on view at Pam right now um would
these paintings exist without the help
of digital tools and does that make
Jason a digital
artist so
um it's unfair to contemporary artists
to pin them or a work of theirs to a
distinct medium this kind of thing only
reinforces market dynamics and
constrains the output of an artist
rather than allow them to think
expansively about their
practice furthermore nobody can really
agree on these things um so here's an
example Corey archangel's work colors is
shown to have a different medium by at
least three museums and entirely
different one on his website you could
just go to his website and see it
computer generated video which is
nothing like what the museums have so um
let's move
on let's take a let's take a look at uh
at the Monumental work levels and bosses
by Miami artist Leo
Casa this work can be expressed as a
playable video game a 360 video three
Channel video a single Channel video
paintings clothing dance performances
and installations among many other
things to fix this work to a particular
medium would be doing it at
disservice at Pam we're exploring how to
appreciate digital art as a variety of
mediums and finding methods of
presentation that suit modern audiences
for instance we launched a streaming
platform for single Channel videos
called Pam TV in August of 2023 I pry uh
everybody please sign up watch some art
in your free time uh it's a lovely
service and there's lots of great things
on there right now um levels and bosses
Leo's work was one of 10 works that we
featured in C change Pam's first hybrid
exhibition this exhibition C change
occupied a gallery of the museum as well
as space on Pam TV our online gallery
for streaming art um at the Museum the
exhibition was an immersive
three-channel survey of video Art Online
the exhibition was distributed around
the world as single Channel videos on
demand and 2022 we launched new
realities an Initiative for
commissioning augmented reality inspired
by the Whitney Museum sunrise sunset
exhibition new realities is meant to be
a single serving entry point to an
artist body of work our first commission
was Carla ganis welcome to the Wonder
camera described by artnet as a retr
futurist romp that mashes up the history
of software the origins of museums and
chief tensions emerging from the most
Advanced Technologies of today new
realities use Pam logo as the stage of
interaction um allowing intervention to
be experienced on print materials like
postcards and coasters as well as
formats like bus stops and coffee mugs
with new realities mundane things like
shopping bags you get after Museum
purchases become an exist an ex an
exhibition space in
themselves so back to Jason safe uh the
Miami painter he uses software to create
patterns in his work the patterns of his
work uh we've worked with him to create
a public version of this software that
he uses and and as an interactive
generative work of art we then developed
software to turn what users generate in
into actual postcards via our software
artist retains full control of their
artwork it's only when you click the
button to create a postcard that Pam
takes over and does the rest for you so
the result is generative art sent
anywhere in the world you can send it to
yourself or give it to a friend or
family member but you're pretty much
guaranteed to be the only person in the
world that have that postcard you can
think of the postcard as its own Gallery
so this has become another commissioning
space tailored towards generative
art our digital methods of presentation
should not imitate static or commercial
spaces of museums and galleries I always
wonder how many artists are painting
drawing coding or making with the idea
that their artwork will be set against
the white
background how does that assumption
change or limit the approach of creative
practice the examples of digital art
prepared for financialization with this
assumption tend to feel
shallow and
emotionless so digital methods are only
the only path towards Museum
survivability to achieve that we must
evolve our understanding of art to
embrace contemporary expressing fixing
art to mediums and inevitably bonds it
to market dynamics and thus selects for
anachronistic methods of
presentation digital galleries
accessibility and multilingual content
are imperative to this effort digital
exponentially broadens audiences you can
fit a few thousand people in a building
on a given day but reach millions of
people over the
Internet a Museum's livelihood have made
up is made up of earned income such as
ticket sales and
souvenirs large gifts and whatever it
scrapes off the
endowment selling access to physical
space is a business plan with
increasingly diminishing returns many
museums have not bounded back from the
pandemic additionally putting a Museum's
welfare in the hands of a few large
donors whether government or private is
incredibly risky and can even lead to
chilling effect due to fear of large
sums being withheld based on a powerful
individual's partialities
recently Moma announced the sale of 70
million dollars in paintings and
sculpture to fund digital capacities in
the future um according to Glenn Lowry
um due to a m was now outgoing
director uh due to a drop in attendance
figures at the Museum uh fig uh doing
due to a drop in attendance figures at
the Museum which have still not fully
rebounded to their pre-pandemic numbers
the museum museum is seeking to build
its traffic online they're growing their
digital audience and they really they
realize they need to increase the
capacity offsite and
online to lay the foundation for this
model we created Pam's first
multilingual content strategy and
released the first version Spanish the
first Spanish style guide this year now
the museum is equivalent in English and
Spanish and we can talk to people from
the bottom of Chile to the top of Canada
for the first time in the Museum's
history we also put the museums
collection online in both English and
Spanish each object with corresponding
visual description for those using
screen readers you might also notice we
avoided using Medium as a category and
opted for more human humanistic
classifications while English is the
most common language of visitors across
the site um our collection pages are
more popular in Spanish than English
right now
Pam is the only Contemporary Art Museum
to employ a wikipedian and residents
Wikipedia averages 18 billion visits per
month expanding our Museum's exposure on
the platform has had fantastic results
many of our monographic exhibitions
feature artists that did not previously
have articles at all such as Chason safe
khita RS Marcela karia additionally
Pam's purview overlaps with many regions
and movements that are traditionally
underrepresented on
Wikipedia so
since originating department at Pam we
have set the standard for multilingual
content in the sector shared Pam's first
ever style guide for Spanish language
launched the streaming platform for
video art originated and released a
document of best practices for
captioning media art thank you you're
welcome I mean
um
uh uh so best practice for capturing
media art in multiple languages and
created a commissioning series for
augmented reality we've created software
that turns generative art into one-of
aind postcards you can mail anywhere in
the world and woven the Museum's
collection and artists into the vast
platform of Wikipedia all of these
efforts efforts will broaden the
Museum's audience to a global scale
everything we do we can think of we
think of democratized Access First and
Global reach first and necessary we can
always put this stuff in a
gallery so leveraging this Foundation
the future a future facing Museum
should' Aspire for lower average
contribution as much as possible
um whether it's ticket sales VOD or
generative souvenirs a larger pool of
small transactions will ensure Financial
stability bolster against censorship and
be a barometer for Community
engagement this is the defining position
proposition of digital engagement to
scale the mission of the museum beyond
the walls of the building to invert to
the traditional model of pilgrimage and
reach audiences beyond our Horizons and
through that become more relevant than
ever to the
public we can collect small Revenue
small donations or revenue from millions
of people via methods like video on
demand exhib or rentals of exhibitions
and selling generative postcards so
we've seen this model reflected in stuff
like political campaigns of our time
what is it like for a museum to have an
average donation of
$27 today I've talked about commissions
and exhibitions that fit something like
this into the Grid in the next year
we're planning on filling in more of the
grid as we expand our commissions and
initiatives next time you're in a museum
or art fair or Gallery try to fit what
you're looking at into this grid and
compare it with how you're receiving
news and information throughout the day
and I'll leave you with one last thought
institutions according to Klay shery
institutions will try to preserve the
problem to which they are the solution
and I think about that every day in
terms of uh museums and how museums can
adapt and change to suit the time so
thank you everybody um pleasure being
here
[Applause]
thank you so much Jay um I had the
privilege of actually going to Miami and
seeing the C chain show in person and it
was really really beautiful we actually
had a smaller popup version of that show
here in the great area Gallery um over
the summer maybe some of you were able
to catch that
um one thing that you know and you know
similar to my question to Victoria
before you you know when you've entered
these spaces that were at varying levels
of digital literacy already or varying
levels of interest in this where in and
maybe you can speak to a couple of
different situations like where did you
where did you feel that you could insert
yourself like how did you get started in
creating these kinds of like broad
Transformations for the digital program
um at any of the spes that you've you've
worked
in yeah thank you Wade and thank you
again for having me here it's been a
pleasure and um there's a lot of
resonance with what Victoria was saying
earlier and yeah it's a different
digital I see as almost like some sort
of liquid that can occupy empty spaces
as it finds them there's always you know
contested space in museums like every
inch of the building is thought of um
and also you know what goes on with the
collection data is how do we how can we
expand the collection data to add
interesting insights to it um the colle
ction a permanent collection of a museum
is a medium in its own right it presents
its own set of constraints what can and
can't you do with the medium and still
pay respect to the artist and the work
um so finding ways to do that properly
is you know boundlessly creative um you
know when I worked at SF Moma The
Collection was like 35 or 40,000 objects
and I thought that was small at the time
CU I was looking at MoMA and the met and
and when I get to Pam our collection is
only 3500 objects large and so it's much
smaller but that means we can actually
use that as a strength and spend more
time with each object and you know when
you apply research to anything it
becomes infinite so with that in mind we
just apply research and we find
interesting things in general though
what did you find to be like the biggest
pain points for you like where did you
find that you had to do in what areas
did you have to do the most advocacy or
like push the hardest or maybe weren't
able to do something that you had wanted
wanted to do because there was just too
much friction yeah um it's always comes
down to changing how people work um you
know introducing a new software and you
know somebody's been using one software
that's 20 years old for you know the
whole time they've been there and then
all of a sudden there's this new thing
and doesn't do the same things it has a
different interface and has different
concepts that are driving it so you know
digital transformation is a word that
gets thrown a lot around a lot
especially in Miami um but uh it not you
can't just plop in a digital department
and then all of a sudden consider it
transformed it's a uneven sort of
transformation that happens throughout
the museum uh and so it takes time and
patience obviously this has to come from
internally to create this kind of change
but obviously you're creating things for
an audience and for the people in your
community what role do uh audience
members and guests and V visitors have
in influencing or participating in
change in their favorite institutions is
there's something that say I as your
average Gallery goer might be able to do
or a way that I might be able to
participate to help facilitate that yeah
the with digital works or digital uh New
Media or whatever the you you stop
having visitors and you start having
users right and so it's always a
particip participatory project and
you're introducing ideas like all of a
sudden quality assurance comes into the
art how do we make sure our members are
comfortable you know you have to a range
for the experience to be applicable to
you know a variety of people not just
the incredibly techsavvy and so put
yourself in a lot of other people's
shoes and um you know see where people
want to participate and let them do it
make it you know frictionless the reason
why I liked texting a lot back in 2017 I
mean I don't know if everybody remembers
but back in 2017 people were all in on
VR and it was like the cool hot thing at
the time and then I was like let's let's
try texting out um and it has to do with
like the ambient technology all around
you that you're already using has a vast
a range of expression that is just not
being leveraged and so these things that
people are already comfortable with you
can kind of sh shine new light on them
for people and um and they can
experience something new awesome thank
you so much Jay I appreciate it so much
one more round of applause for Jay thank
you